# Appendix 4 <br> New guidelines on types and metrics of scholarship in the CE track

---

# Clinician-Educator Track 2017 Guidelines for Appointment and Promotion at Yale Medical School 

This document provides updated guidelines for academic appointment and promotion for the clinician-educator faculty at Yale Medical School. It recognizes the critical role that these faculty play in the clinical, research and educational missions of the Medical School and Medical Center. It defines criteria for evaluating Clinician-Educator faculty that uphold existing Yale standards for excellence, innovation, and scholarship, while defining a broader range of activities that should be considered in the evaluation process.

The evaluation process takes into consideration each faculty member's unique combination of accomplishments in both the clinical and educational arenas. While some faculty may focus and excel in one arena or the other, most will make important and interwoven contributions in both domains. The updated guidelines emphasize the need for each faculty member to articulate their full portfolio of activities and the impact of their contributions.

Thus, Clinician-Educators seeking academic promotion should present evidence of distinguished accomplishments in the clinical or educational arenas, or both. Clinical excellence should be supported by recognition of a high level of clinical expertise, together with evidence for influence on clinical practice, innovative program development or clinical investigation. Educational excellence should be supported by recognition of a high level of teaching expertise, together with quality contributions in the areas of curriculum development, mentoring, educational leadership or educational scholarship.

For both clinical and educational activities, the following parameters are considered: quality, scholarship and recognition. Quality is defined by superior activities and innovation based on objective measures and peer recognition. Activities must be of a sufficient quantity to make substantial contributions, but quantity alone is not sufficient for advancement. Scholarship is a required metric and is defined broadly as materials that are a) peer reviewed, b) available in the public domain, and c) significantly contribute to the field. Scholarship is not limited simply to peer reviewed original research and may occur in print or another media. It may include the following: publication of original research, reviews, editorials and chapters; clinical guidelines and consensus statements; educational material including syllabi, curricula, web-based training modules and courses; educational methods, policy statements, and assessment tools. Recognition is defined by dissemination and adoption outside of Yale, reputation by independent peer review, and measurable impact in the field.

Promotion to Associate Professor requires a regional and emerging national reputation for excellence in clinical and/or educational activities with supporting scholarship. Promotion to Professor also requires a national and/or international reputation for scholarship that has advanced the field and outstanding accomplishments in clinical and/or educational activities as outlined above.

This document is intended to provide guidelines regarding the criteria for appointment and promotion at Yale Medical School. It provides a framework for the faculty to detail their contributions in the CV Supplement that is required with application for appointment or promotion. It also defines criteria to be used by Departmental and School appointment and promotions committees to provide equitable evaluations of applicants.

---

# Clinical Accomplishments 

- Clinical Expertise: High level clinical expertise is required for excellence in patient care and training in the Medical Center. Excellence in clinical care should be supported by evidence of individual accomplishments within the Medical Center, as well as by recognition by experts in the Medical Center, regionally and nationally/internationally.
- Influencing Clinical Practice: Innovation in the prevention, management and treatment of disease and in clinical diagnostic procedures furthers the mission of the Medical Center and contributes to the field. Innovation that influences clinical practice should be supported by evidence of scholarship, regional and national presentations, and recognition by experts in the Medical Center, regionally and nationally/internationally.
- Clinical Program Development: New program development enhances patient care within the Medical Center, provides opportunities for research and enhances the education of trainees. Clinical program development is often multidisciplinary, and in this case, identifiable contributions of the individual to the program should be recognized. Evidence for outstanding clinical program development should be supported by recognition by experts in the Medical Center, regionally and nationally/internationally.
- Clinical Investigation: Clinical investigation is fundamental to achieving excellence in patient care, through analysis of outcomes, quality improvement, developing new procedures or therapies, and testing the impact of specific interventions or innovation. Clinical investigation ultimately contributes to progress in the field. Clinical investigation requires peer review and dissemination through presentations and publications. Investigation that contributes to the field should be supported by recognition by regional, national and international experts.

---

| Clinical Activities | Metrics |
| :--: | :--: |
| Individual Clinical Expertise: | - Regional patient referrals <br> - Medical Center clinical excellence awards <br> - Regional and national clinical excellence awards <br> - National society leadership <br> - Membership on national guideline committees <br> - Invited talks at national meetings <br> - Invited professorships and talks at peer institutions <br> - Peer reviewer for clinical journals <br> - Editorial board membership <br> - Director for national/international meetings <br> - Regional/national/international reputation amongst peers |
| Influencing clinical practice: | - New surgical and interventional procedures and techniques <br> - Novel diagnostic laboratory or imaging techniques <br> - New pharmacological or cell-based therapeutic strategies <br> - Development of clinical guidelines that affect local clinical practice <br> - Presentations and publications disseminating new clinical approaches <br> - Original research, review articles, books, chapters and editorials <br> - Quality improvement initiatives leading to demonstrable and significant improvement in institutional outcomes <br> - Adoption of new quality improvement initiatives by peer institutions and/or national guidelines. |
| Clinical Program Development: | - Innovative multi-disciplinary programs that add value to patient care <br> - Development of clinical care models <br> - Involvement in crafting and writing clinical practice guidelines <br> - New application of existing technologies <br> - National dissemination of new clinical programs with adoption by peer institutions |
| Clinical investigation | - Investigator initiated research (federal and foundation) <br> - Investigator initiated research (commercially sponsored) <br> - Participation in clinical trials as site investigator (federal and foundation) <br> - Participation in clinical trials as site investigator (commercially sponsored) <br> - First or corresponding authorship on original research <br> - Co-authored contributions to collaborative original research <br> - Impact of research (citations and change in practice guidelines) <br> - Recognition by national experts in the field |

---

# Educational Accomplishments: 

- Teaching: Excellence in teaching is critical to the educational mission of the School and Medical Center. Superior teaching evaluations are expected for all faculty seeking promotion in the CE track. Excellence in teaching may also be evidenced by any of the following: teaching awards, educational scholarship and/or adoption of curricular ideas and materials by peers outside of Yale.
- Curriculum Development: Innovative curriculum development is important to maintain the quality of educational programs in the School. Excellence in curriculum development should be supported by superior evaluations from trainees, assessment methods demonstrating the effectiveness of the curriculum (successful knowledge or skill acquisition), and curriculum dissemination with peer recognition outside of Yale.
- Mentoring: Individual mentoring is important to guide a trainee's career development. Excellence in mentoring should be supported by the success of trainees and peer recognition.
- Educational Leadership: Successful educational leadership is critical to the institution's educational mission. Success of its leaders should be supported by impact of the educational program, recognition at both a local and national level, and membership on regional and national education committees.

| Educator Activities | Metrics |
| :--: | :--: |
| Didactic and/or <br> Clinical Teaching: | - Trainees' evaluations <br> - Increasing teaching profile and responsibility <br> - Teaching awards and honors <br> - Publication of educational materials in a peer-reviewed venue or repository <br> - Citations of educational materials in peer-reviewed materials <br> - Regional and national/international as well as local reputation |
| Curriculum <br> Development: | - Trainees' evaluations of course or program <br> - Outcomes (e.g., NBME subject scores, in-service examination scores) <br> - Peer review by local experts, the institution's curriculum committee, or accreditation reviewers <br> - Invited presentations on curriculum development at regional, national, or international meetings, and other departments and schools <br> - Funding for innovative curriculum projects <br> - Acceptance of curriculum materials in a peer-reviewed repository <br> - Adoption of curriculum materials or processes at other institutions <br> - Peer-reviewed acceptance of a new curriculum model (e.g. AAMC's MedEdPORTAL) <br> - Citations of the curriculum |
| Mentoring: | - Evaluations of advising and mentoring effectiveness by trainees <br> - Publications with current and prior trainees |

---

|  | - Trainees subsequent accomplishments: current position, academic rank, publications, and awards <br> - Presentations at national conferences on mentoring <br> - Invitations to serve as a consultant to other organizations on mentoring <br> - Funding for innovative mentoring-related projects <br> - National as well as local recognition for mentoring |
| :--: | :--: |
| Educational Leadership: | - Residency or fellowship director-success of program, based on national stature, accomplishments of trainees, subsequent stature of trainees <br> - Ability to attract highly qualified candidates <br> - Improvement in diversity through increasing enrollment of minorities and women <br> - Course director-success of course directed by candidate determined by evaluations <br> - Senior local leadership <br> - Awards received at School and by professional societies <br> - Invitations to talk on educational topics at regional, national, and international professional meetings <br> - Participation in task forces/guideline committees in education <br> - Funding for innovative educational programs <br> - Educational scholarship (articles and books) <br> - Service on editorial boards of educational journals |