**Application for Visiting Students in Research**

This form should be completed and submitted by the faculty sponsor of the student who wishes to participate in an educational research experience under the mentorship of a Yale faculty member. The student must be at least 18 years of age at the start of the proposed activities, and must be a currently enrolled undergraduate student in an accredited degree-granting institution other than Yale. This form is not needed for Yale students. Recent graduates of undergraduate degree programs may also be considered as exceptions on a case-by-case basis, if they have not yet enrolled in a graduate degree program.

For faculty in FAS, this form should be submitted to your department chair for review.

For faculty in professional schools (including YSM and YSN), this form does not require review by the chair and should be submitted directly to your dean or his/her designee as noted below. The proposed activities must not begin until approval is received from the cognizant provost or his/her designee, and all stipulated reviews and training are completed.

***Please note that this form is to be submitted by email only.***

**Section 1 – Faculty Sponsor or Program Director to complete this section**

Name and Department of PI:

Email address of PI:

Contact person for PI (if different):

Name of student:

Date of Birth: Age at the start of the proposed activities:

Address:

Relationship to PI (if applicable):

Current undergraduate institution:

Degree Program: Anticipated date of undergraduate degree completion:

Description of proposed activities. Please include:

- A detailed summary of the educational component of the proposed program (“work in lab”, “apprenticeship” etc. are insufficient.) Proposed activities must be primarily educational in nature and must be for the benefit of the student.
- Chemicals, model systems, human subjects, materials, and/or lab equipment to be used by the participant during the course of the activity

Do the proposed activities involve any of the following? (check all that apply)

1. **Biological Materials**

Human materials and other potentially infectious materials (includes primary or

continuous human cells, human tissues and body fluids)

Human infectious organisms (BL2 and higher) and/or non-exempt recombinant DNA materials

Note:

- Applicants will require authorization from the Yale Biological Safety Committee in order to work with Risk Group 2 human pathogens
- Applicants may not conduct work with Risk Group 3 Pathogens
- No work with Risk Group 4 Pathogens is allowed at Yale University by any personnel

Live animals

Work with protected health information

1. **Chemical Materials**

Known carcinogenic materials

Known human reproductive toxins

Highly toxic chemicals (LD_{50} < 50 mg/kg oral-rat)

Reactive or pyrophoric materials

Controlled substances

Disinfectants (e.g. Cidex, Caviwipes)

1. **Radiation**

Ionizing radiation-generating equipment (XRD, X-ray, fluoroscopy, accelerator, cyclotron)

Radioactive materials

Unshielded lasers ≥ class 3B

High magnetic field equipment (> 5 G)

1. **Physical Materials**

High voltage equipment

Class 3 or higher shop equipment

If you checked any of the above items in A-D, please describe:

**E. Animal research** *(if checked, please refer to Appendix A, Section II)*

**F. Human subjects and/or work in clinical areas** *(if checked, please refer to Appendix A, Section III)*

**G. School of Medicine, School of Nursing, or Psychology** *(if checked, please refer to Appendix A, Section IV)*

Location and description of the area where the activity will take place:

Building:

Room:

Other location(s) (if applicable):

Proposed stipend/financial support (if any) and source of funds:

Does this source of funds allow compensation via stipend? (see below)

Note: if the proposed financial support is from a sponsored award, the sponsor must **specifically stipulate that it may be paid via stipend**, to support an educational experience (e.g. an NSF REU supplement). Stipends are generally not allowable on federal research grants, even when the proposed activities appear to benefit the research project. They are only allowed if there are specific training activities included in the scope of work as proposed and awarded by the federal sponsor. Please see Appendix B for a more detailed description of stipends; if there is any uncertainty as to whether stipends are allowable on a particular award, please contact the Office of Grant and Contract Administration for assistance.

Proposed start/end dates:

Person responsible for ensuring that all training is complete before any research activity begins:

Person responsible for day-to-day lab supervision:

Contact phone number for day-to-day supervisor:

Supervisory plan: please provide a description of the planned oversight for the student’s activities and the controls that will help to ensure the safety of the student and others involved in the research, including any human subjects (e.g. observation only, protective equipment, fume hood, biosafety cabinet).

I certify that I have reviewed the policy governing Visiting Students in Research, and will be responsible for following all policies and procedures related to the applicant’s participation in the proposed activities.

**Name (please type)****: Date:**

**FAS faculty**: please email this form to your department chair for review.

**School of Medicine Faculty:** please email this form to Ysm.Vsr@yale.edu.

**School of Nursing Faculty:** please email this form to margaret.grey@yale.edu.

**School of Forestry and Environmental Studies Faculty**: please email this form to peter.crane@yale.edu.

**SECTION 2 – Reviewing Department Chair to complete this section (FAS only)**

I have reviewed the content of this proposal, have found it to be consistent with the University Policy Governing Visiting Students in Research, and recommend approval by the cognizant provost or his/her designee pending additional training or requirements stipulated by EHS and other bodies, as appropriate.

Name (please type): Date:

Comments:

**FAS Chairs:** after **electronically** completing the above section please **EMAIL** this form to fasstudents@yale.edu. *Please note that a written signature and/or hardcopy is NOT needed.*

**SECTION 3 – Reviewing provost, dean or designee to complete this section**

**Note: this section is optional. If the reviewing provost, dean or designee has no additional comments, uploading the application to the sharepoint site for EHS review constitutes approval of the application (pending any additional requirements as stipulated by EHS or others).**

I have reviewed the content of this proposal, have found it to be consistent with the University Policy Governing Visiting Students in Research, and approve the application pending additional training or requirements stipulated by EHS and other bodies, as appropriate.

Name: Date:

Comments:

**Appendix A: Training Requirements**

1. **Safety**
- Environmental Health & Safety (EHS) will review all approved applications to determine the specific training requirements, if any, that are applicable to the proposed activities.
- EHS will communicate the training requirements directly to the PI and the training coordinator identified in the application.
- If there are any changes to the visiting student’s research plan, EHS must be notified prior to new work to be performed
- For questions on Safety training, please contact safetytraining@yale.edu
1. **Animal Research**
- Environmental Health & Safety (EHS) forward applications to IACUC, who will determine if any specific training requirements are applicable to the proposed activities.
- IACUC will communicate any training requirements related to animal research directly to the faculty applicant.
- The PI’s IACUC protocol may need to be modified before the student begins work.
- For questions on requirements and training, please contact IACUC@yale.edu or safetytraining@yale.edu
1. **Human Subjects and work in Clinical Areas**
- If the proposed activity involves human subjects research or other work in or around a clinical area (see http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/responsibility/start.html), the HIC protocol may need to be revised to include the student. In addition, please ensure that the individual receives the appropriate human subjects protection training as stipulated prior to participating in the proposed activity.
- For more information on human subjects protection training, please see: http://www.yale.edu/hrpp/education/index.html or contact HRPP@yale.edu.
- Some activities may have requirements for health screening and vaccinations. Any such requirements will be communicated by EHS to the applicant at the time of approval.
- For questions on requirements and training, please contact dorothyann.vanrhijn@yale.edu
1. **HIPAA**
- Participants located in the School of Medicine, the School of Nursing, or in the Psychology Clinic must complete HIPAA training.
- For questions on HIPAA training, please contact HIPAA@yale.edu or see http://hipaa.yale.edu/

**Appendix B – Stipend Payments**

Stipends are payments made to individuals for subsistence support or to defray expenses during a period of academic appointment. Stipend payments are not compensation for services rendered and, therefore, are not allowable on federal awards unless the purpose of the agreement is to provide training to selected participants and the charge is approved by the sponsoring agency (OMB Circular A-21, Section J45).

There are, however, some instances where stipend expenses are allowable. Sponsored funds intended to support training or research training will state that intention clearly in the agency program announcement. The scope of work in the proposal and award agreements should also state explicitly that training or research training of specific individuals is a purpose of the award. In such cases, stipend expenses are expected and allowable. Typical training awards include NIH "T" and "F" awards and NASA's various fellowship programs. Other awards where the training intention in the proposal and award agreement is described clearly and accepted by the federal sponsor can also include stipend expenses.

Sponsored research funds generally reimburse the University for the allowable cost of services rendered. Stipends do not reflect payments in exchange for services and they are ordinarily not allowed on sponsored research awards. If an individual is providing benefit to a project under the direction of a principal investigator, he or she should be paid as an employee (a Research Assistant if a graduate student or a Postdoctoral Associate if a postdoctoral appointee).

Stipends are only allowed if there are specific training activities included in the scope of work as proposed and awarded by the federal sponsor.